en/common/opsi_manual_directory-connector.asciidoc, before:

﻿////
; Copyright (c) uib gmbh (www.uib.de)
; This documentation is owned by uib
; and published under the german creative commons by-sa license
; see:
; http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/de/
; http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/de/legalcode
; english:
; http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/
; http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/legalcode
;
; credits: http://www.opsi.org/credits/
////

:Author:    uib gmbh
:Email:     info@uib.de
:Revision:  1
:toclevels: 6
:toc:
:numbered:
:doctype:   book

[[opsi-manual-dircon]]
=== 'opsi directory connector'


[[opsi-manual-dircon-introduction]]
==== Introduction

The opsi directory connector is a tool to transfer data from an directory service
to an opsi installation.
This avoids the need of maintaining data in two separate systems.

[[opsi-manual-dircon-preconditions]]
==== Prerequisites for the opsi extension 'opsi directory connector'

This module is currently a
link:https://www.opsi.org/product/extensions-of-opsi/[co-funded opsi extension]. +
Some preconditions are required, in order to use this module. That means that you need a suitable modules file to unlock this extension. You can get this file by purchasing the extension module. For evaluation purposes you can get a temporary modules file without charge. ( -> mail us at info@uib.de). +


[[opsi-manual-dircon-preconditions-general]]
===== General Requirements

The source directory service must implement the LDAP protocol.
Samba 4 or Active Directory are examples for directory services that support the LDAP protocol.

The target opsi server should run at least opsi 4.0.7.
Prior versions may work but have not been tested.

The machine running the connector must have access to the ones running
the directory and opsi over the network.

It is possible to have everything running on the same server but this manual will assume that different machines are used.

[[opsi-manual-dircon-preconditions-hw]]
===== Hardware-Requirements

These requirements are intended for a basic use in a small-sized environment
with up to 500 clients.
The requirements may change running the connector in larger environments
so please be aware that adjustments may be necessary.

* 256 MB of free RAM
* Network connection

[[opsi-manual-dircon-preconditions-sw]]
===== Software-Requirements

The installation and operation is only supported on Linux.
Support for Windows is not planned.

On the machine the following has to be installed.

* Python 3.4 or newer

The following modules for Python 3:

* ldap3
* requests

Because the communication is implemented using standardized protocols
the connector does not require any specific opsi- or directory-components
to be installed.

Installing the connector through your operating system's package manager will install these requirements automatically.

[[opsi-manual-dircon-installation]]
==== Installation

Please use your operating system's package manager to install the package `opsi-directory-connector`.

On an Debian-based machine installation can be done like this:
[source,prompt]
----
apt-get install opsi-directory-connector
----

[[opsi-manual-dircon-configuration]]
==== Configuration

The connector features a variety of settings to fit into different
environments.

The configuration is made in a JSON-formatted file and must contain valid JSON!
To specify any boolean value please use `true` or `false`. Text has to
be entered in double quotes like `"this is text"`.

An example configuration will be provided at `/etc/opsi/opsidirectoryconnector.example.conf`.
This file can be used as a template for your own configurations.

[source,prompt]
----
cp /etc/opsi/opsidirectoryconnector.example.conf /etc/opsi/opsidirectoryconnector-custom.conf
----

[[opsi-manual-dircon-conf-dir]]
===== Directory settings

These are the settings required to access the directory and limit
the search scopes to specific areas and entries.

[source,json]
----
{
    "directory": {
        "address": "ldap://192.168.12.34",
        "user": "DOMAIN\\opsiconnector",
        "password": "insertpasswordhere",
        "search_base": "dc=testcompy,dc=local",
        "search_query_computers": "(objectClass=computer) ",
        "search_query_groups": "(objectClass=organizationalUnit)",
        "connection_options": {
            "start_tls": true
        }
    },
    …
}
----

Under `address` you specify the directory-server.
`user` and `password` are required for authentication at the directory.

NOTE: We recommend using a dedicated user account.

NOTE: Many systems expect to receive the full DN as username. Example: `uid=opsiconnect,cn=users,dc=test,dc=intranet`.

With `search_base` you specify the location from where on the connector
looks for matching entries.
Through `search_query_computers` and `search_query_groups` the conditions
for finding entries can be configured.
Either `search_query_computers` or `search_query_groups` or both need to be configured. To disable one of these set them to `""`.
The search for groups will be implemented in a future version. Until then the setting has no effect.

The parameter `connection_options` contains additional options to configure the connection.
With `start_tls` it is possible the control if a secure connection should be used.

NOTE: Additional connection options will be implemented on demand.

Since version 14 it is possible to test the connection to the directory through the paramter `--check-directory` without connecting to the opsi server.


[[opsi-manual-dircon-conf-dir-ucs]]
===== Configure connnection for UCS

For a connection to Univention Corporate Server the full DN hast do be used as username.

For a search through the complete directory you can set `search_base` to the output of the command `ucr get ldap/base`.


To search for Windows clients you can set `search_query_computers` to `(objectClass=univentionWindows)`.


[[opsi-manual-dircon-conf-work]]
===== Behaviour settings

These settings defines the behaviour of the connector.

[source,json]
----
{
    …
    "behaviour": {
        "write_changes_to_opsi": true,
        "root_dir_in_opsi": "Directory",
        "update_existing_clients": true,
        "prefer_location_from_directory": true
    },
    …
}
----

If `write_changes_to_opsi` is set to `false` no data will be written to
opsi. This can be used to check settings before applying them.

Via `root_dir_in_opsi` you define what group should be used as the root
in opsi. You need to make sure that this group exists.

If `update_existing_clients` is set to `false` clients already
existing in opsi will not be altered.
If this is set to `true` clients may have any manually set data overridden
with the values from the directory.

If `prefer_location_from_directory` is set to `true` clients will be
moved in opsi to the same location they have in the directory.
If you want to disable this set it to `false`.

[[opsi-manual-dircon-conf-map]]
===== Attribute-Mappings

With a system as flexible as a directory service the connector must
be given information about what attributes in the directory match these
of the corresponding opsi objects.

[source,json]
----
{
    …
    "mapping": {
        "client": {
            "id": "name",
            "description": "description",
            "notes": "",
            "hardwareAddress": "",
            "ipAddress": "",
            "inventoryNumber": "",
            "oneTimePassword": ""
        },
        "group": {
            "id": "name",
            "description": "description",
            "notes": ""
        }
    },
    …
}
----

There is a mapping for clients and one for groups.

The key of each mapping is the attribute in opsi and the value is the attribute from the directory. If the value (in the mapping) is empty no mapping will be done.

NOTE: If the value read from the directory for the client ID does not seem to be an FQDN an FQDN will be created. The domain part for this will be created from the DC of the read element.

[[opsi-manual-dircon-conf-conect]]
===== opsi connection settings

This specifies how the connector accesses opsi.

[source,json]
----
{
    …
    "opsi": {
        "address": "https://localhost:4447",
        "username": "syncuser",
        "password": "secret",
        "connection_options": {
            "verify_certificate": true
        }
    }
}
----

Set `address` to the address of your opsi server. Please include the
port.

NOTE: To use a proxy for the connection use the environment variable 'HTTPS_PROXY'.

`username` and `password` should be set accordingly to authenticate
at the opsi server.

NOTE: We recommended setting up a dedicated user for this task. Refer to the document _Getting Started_ on how to do this.

With `connection_options` the options for connecting to opsi can be set.
`verify_certificate` configures the verification of the server certificate.
For selfsigned certificates this can be set to `false`.

Since version 14 it is possible to test the connection to the opsi server through the paramter `--check-opsi` without connecting to the directory.


[[opsi-manual-dircon-run]]
==== Running the connector

After installation a binary called `opsidirectoryconnector` will
be present on the system.

It is required to pass an argument `--config` together with the path to
the configuration.

[source,prompt]
----
opsidirectoryconnector --config /etc/opsi/opsidirectoryconnector-custom.conf
----

NOTE: The user running the binary does not require any access to opsi as this is all specified in the configuration.

[[opsi-manual-dircon-run-systemd]]
===== Example: recurring runs with systemd

The connector currently does one synchronisation run when executed but
the chances are good that you want to have a constant synchronisation of data.

It is easy to automate the execution of the connector to have recurring runs.

We will use systemd for this.
In contrast to cronjobs systemd will avoid overlapping runs and is therefore
a good choice.

The following example will set up the connector so that it is run five minutes after the machine was booted and from then on every hour.

We require two files that need to be placed in the corresponding directory
for user-defined units.
The path where this files need to be stored may vary between operating systems.
Please use `pkg-config` to obtain the path your system uses by running the following command:

[source,prompt]
----
pkg-config systemd --variable=systemduserunitdir
----

In this directory you need to place the two following files.
One for the timer that makes the job recurring and one for the job itself.

Please put this inside `opsi-directory-connector.timer`:

[source,configfile]
----
[Unit]
Description=Start the opsi-directory-connector in regular intervals

[Timer]
OnBootSec=5min
OnUnitActiveSec=1hour

[Install]
WantedBy=timers.target
----

And this is the content of `opsi-directory-connector.service`:

[source,configfile]
----
[Unit]
Description=Sync clients from AD to opsi.
Wants=network.target

[Service]
Type=oneshot
ExecStart=/usr/bin/opsidirectoryconnector --config /etc/opsi/opsidirectoryconnector-custom.conf
----

To enable the timer and start it right away use the following commands:

[source,prompt]
----
systemctl enable opsi-directory-connector.timer
systemctl start opsi-directory-connector.timer
----

If the timer does not get started it will be first run after the next reboot of the machine.


[[opsi-manual-dircon-run-cronjob]]
===== Example: recurring runs as cronjob

It is easy to automate recurring runs through a cronjob.

Please be aware that overlapping runs may happen with cron and therefore the interval should be higher.
To avoid this problem it is recommended to use *systemd* instead of *cron*

The cronjob file can usually be edited through `crontab -e`.
For an synchronisation that happens every hour there can be used the following:

[source,prompt]
----
0 * * * * /usr/bin/opsidirectoryconnector --config /etc/opsi/opsidirectoryconnector-custom.conf
----

Commit message:

Give hint about uid instead of dn.

en/common/opsi_manual_directory-connector.asciidoc, after:

﻿////
; Copyright (c) uib gmbh (www.uib.de)
; This documentation is owned by uib
; and published under the german creative commons by-sa license
; see:
; http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/de/
; http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/de/legalcode
; english:
; http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/
; http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/legalcode
;
; credits: http://www.opsi.org/credits/
////

:Author:    uib gmbh
:Email:     info@uib.de
:Revision:  1
:toclevels: 6
:toc:
:numbered:
:doctype:   book

[[opsi-manual-dircon]]
=== 'opsi directory connector'


[[opsi-manual-dircon-introduction]]
==== Introduction

The opsi directory connector is a tool to transfer data from an directory service
to an opsi installation.
This avoids the need of maintaining data in two separate systems.

[[opsi-manual-dircon-preconditions]]
==== Prerequisites for the opsi extension 'opsi directory connector'

This module is currently a
link:https://www.opsi.org/product/extensions-of-opsi/[co-funded opsi extension]. +
Some preconditions are required, in order to use this module. That means that you need a suitable modules file to unlock this extension. You can get this file by purchasing the extension module. For evaluation purposes you can get a temporary modules file without charge. ( -> mail us at info@uib.de). +


[[opsi-manual-dircon-preconditions-general]]
===== General Requirements

The source directory service must implement the LDAP protocol.
Samba 4 or Active Directory are examples for directory services that support the LDAP protocol.

The target opsi server should run at least opsi 4.0.7.
Prior versions may work but have not been tested.

The machine running the connector must have access to the ones running
the directory and opsi over the network.

It is possible to have everything running on the same server but this manual will assume that different machines are used.

[[opsi-manual-dircon-preconditions-hw]]
===== Hardware-Requirements

These requirements are intended for a basic use in a small-sized environment
with up to 500 clients.
The requirements may change running the connector in larger environments
so please be aware that adjustments may be necessary.

* 256 MB of free RAM
* Network connection

[[opsi-manual-dircon-preconditions-sw]]
===== Software-Requirements

The installation and operation is only supported on Linux.
Support for Windows is not planned.

On the machine the following has to be installed.

* Python 3.4 or newer

The following modules for Python 3:

* ldap3
* requests

Because the communication is implemented using standardized protocols
the connector does not require any specific opsi- or directory-components
to be installed.

Installing the connector through your operating system's package manager will install these requirements automatically.

[[opsi-manual-dircon-installation]]
==== Installation

Please use your operating system's package manager to install the package `opsi-directory-connector`.

On an Debian-based machine installation can be done like this:
[source,prompt]
----
apt-get install opsi-directory-connector
----

[[opsi-manual-dircon-configuration]]
==== Configuration

The connector features a variety of settings to fit into different
environments.

The configuration is made in a JSON-formatted file and must contain valid JSON!
To specify any boolean value please use `true` or `false`. Text has to
be entered in double quotes like `"this is text"`.

An example configuration will be provided at `/etc/opsi/opsidirectoryconnector.example.conf`.
This file can be used as a template for your own configurations.

[source,prompt]
----
cp /etc/opsi/opsidirectoryconnector.example.conf /etc/opsi/opsidirectoryconnector-custom.conf
----

[[opsi-manual-dircon-conf-dir]]
===== Directory settings

These are the settings required to access the directory and limit
the search scopes to specific areas and entries.

[source,json]
----
{
    "directory": {
        "address": "ldap://192.168.12.34",
        "user": "DOMAIN\\opsiconnector",
        "password": "insertpasswordhere",
        "search_base": "dc=testcompy,dc=local",
        "search_query_computers": "(objectClass=computer) ",
        "search_query_groups": "(objectClass=organizationalUnit)",
        "connection_options": {
            "start_tls": true
        }
    },
    …
}
----

Under `address` you specify the directory-server.
`user` and `password` are required for authentication at the directory.

NOTE: We recommend using a dedicated user account.

NOTE: Many systems expect to receive the full DN as username. Example: `uid=opsiconnect,cn=users,dc=test,dc=intranet`.

With `search_base` you specify the location from where on the connector
looks for matching entries.
Through `search_query_computers` and `search_query_groups` the conditions
for finding entries can be configured.
Either `search_query_computers` or `search_query_groups` or both need to be configured. To disable one of these set them to `""`.
The search for groups will be implemented in a future version. Until then the setting has no effect.

The parameter `connection_options` contains additional options to configure the connection.
With `start_tls` it is possible the control if a secure connection should be used.

NOTE: Additional connection options will be implemented on demand.

Since version 14 it is possible to test the connection to the directory through the paramter `--check-directory` without connecting to the opsi server.


[[opsi-manual-dircon-conf-dir-ucs]]
===== Configure connnection for UCS

For a connection to Univention Corporate Server the full DN hast do be used as username.
Instead of `dn=` one has to use `uid=`.

For a search through the complete directory you can set `search_base` to the output of the command `ucr get ldap/base`.


To search for Windows clients you can set `search_query_computers` to `(objectClass=univentionWindows)`.


[[opsi-manual-dircon-conf-work]]
===== Behaviour settings

These settings defines the behaviour of the connector.

[source,json]
----
{
    …
    "behaviour": {
        "write_changes_to_opsi": true,
        "root_dir_in_opsi": "Directory",
        "update_existing_clients": true,
        "prefer_location_from_directory": true
    },
    …
}
----

If `write_changes_to_opsi` is set to `false` no data will be written to
opsi. This can be used to check settings before applying them.

Via `root_dir_in_opsi` you define what group should be used as the root
in opsi. You need to make sure that this group exists.

If `update_existing_clients` is set to `false` clients already
existing in opsi will not be altered.
If this is set to `true` clients may have any manually set data overridden
with the values from the directory.

If `prefer_location_from_directory` is set to `true` clients will be
moved in opsi to the same location they have in the directory.
If you want to disable this set it to `false`.

[[opsi-manual-dircon-conf-map]]
===== Attribute-Mappings

With a system as flexible as a directory service the connector must
be given information about what attributes in the directory match these
of the corresponding opsi objects.

[source,json]
----
{
    …
    "mapping": {
        "client": {
            "id": "name",
            "description": "description",
            "notes": "",
            "hardwareAddress": "",
            "ipAddress": "",
            "inventoryNumber": "",
            "oneTimePassword": ""
        },
        "group": {
            "id": "name",
            "description": "description",
            "notes": ""
        }
    },
    …
}
----

There is a mapping for clients and one for groups.

The key of each mapping is the attribute in opsi and the value is the attribute from the directory. If the value (in the mapping) is empty no mapping will be done.

NOTE: If the value read from the directory for the client ID does not seem to be an FQDN an FQDN will be created. The domain part for this will be created from the DC of the read element.

[[opsi-manual-dircon-conf-conect]]
===== opsi connection settings

This specifies how the connector accesses opsi.

[source,json]
----
{
    …
    "opsi": {
        "address": "https://localhost:4447",
        "username": "syncuser",
        "password": "secret",
        "connection_options": {
            "verify_certificate": true
        }
    }
}
----

Set `address` to the address of your opsi server. Please include the
port.

NOTE: To use a proxy for the connection use the environment variable 'HTTPS_PROXY'.

`username` and `password` should be set accordingly to authenticate
at the opsi server.

NOTE: We recommended setting up a dedicated user for this task. Refer to the document _Getting Started_ on how to do this.

With `connection_options` the options for connecting to opsi can be set.
`verify_certificate` configures the verification of the server certificate.
For selfsigned certificates this can be set to `false`.

Since version 14 it is possible to test the connection to the opsi server through the paramter `--check-opsi` without connecting to the directory.


[[opsi-manual-dircon-run]]
==== Running the connector

After installation a binary called `opsidirectoryconnector` will
be present on the system.

It is required to pass an argument `--config` together with the path to
the configuration.

[source,prompt]
----
opsidirectoryconnector --config /etc/opsi/opsidirectoryconnector-custom.conf
----

NOTE: The user running the binary does not require any access to opsi as this is all specified in the configuration.

[[opsi-manual-dircon-run-systemd]]
===== Example: recurring runs with systemd

The connector currently does one synchronisation run when executed but
the chances are good that you want to have a constant synchronisation of data.

It is easy to automate the execution of the connector to have recurring runs.

We will use systemd for this.
In contrast to cronjobs systemd will avoid overlapping runs and is therefore
a good choice.

The following example will set up the connector so that it is run five minutes after the machine was booted and from then on every hour.

We require two files that need to be placed in the corresponding directory
for user-defined units.
The path where this files need to be stored may vary between operating systems.
Please use `pkg-config` to obtain the path your system uses by running the following command:

[source,prompt]
----
pkg-config systemd --variable=systemduserunitdir
----

In this directory you need to place the two following files.
One for the timer that makes the job recurring and one for the job itself.

Please put this inside `opsi-directory-connector.timer`:

[source,configfile]
----
[Unit]
Description=Start the opsi-directory-connector in regular intervals

[Timer]
OnBootSec=5min
OnUnitActiveSec=1hour

[Install]
WantedBy=timers.target
----

And this is the content of `opsi-directory-connector.service`:

[source,configfile]
----
[Unit]
Description=Sync clients from AD to opsi.
Wants=network.target

[Service]
Type=oneshot
ExecStart=/usr/bin/opsidirectoryconnector --config /etc/opsi/opsidirectoryconnector-custom.conf
----

To enable the timer and start it right away use the following commands:

[source,prompt]
----
systemctl enable opsi-directory-connector.timer
systemctl start opsi-directory-connector.timer
----

If the timer does not get started it will be first run after the next reboot of the machine.


[[opsi-manual-dircon-run-cronjob]]
===== Example: recurring runs as cronjob

It is easy to automate recurring runs through a cronjob.

Please be aware that overlapping runs may happen with cron and therefore the interval should be higher.
To avoid this problem it is recommended to use *systemd* instead of *cron*

The cronjob file can usually be edited through `crontab -e`.
For an synchronisation that happens every hour there can be used the following:

[source,prompt]
----
0 * * * * /usr/bin/opsidirectoryconnector --config /etc/opsi/opsidirectoryconnector-custom.conf
----
